So it was for those reasons and more that Microsoft decided
to change its main application format.
Instead of.
exe we have.
app.
I want to turn our attention now to the Universal Windows Platform or UWP.
First, a brief history lesson.
In Windows 8 Microsoft gave us these new apps that ran in
a full screen with no window chrome,
and by window chrome I'm talking about the minimize,
maximize, and close buttons or even menus or toolbar buttons.
Very different and jarring interface for many.
Did not go over in the public very well actually.
They were called metro apps for a while,
they were called universal apps for a while.
Now they're called UWP apps, at least for now.
Some of the underlying ideas is that Microsoft wanted a
universal platform for applications, not just apps that Microsoft develops,
but third-party developers as well,
such that if you fire up the same app on your PC,
on you Xbox, on your phone,
on your surface tablet you get the exact same
interface with full inter-compatibility.
Microsoft had a variant version of Windows 8 for a while called
Windows RT that was optimized for tablets.
That operating system is long gone now though.
As I said, a lot of customer backlash to Windows 8.
Losing the Start menu is probably number one.
The confusion about universal or metro apps probably number two, but Windows 8.
1 gave us a more consistent app store interface,
as well as the ability to sideload apps.
Sideload is kind of a slang term that refers to making these
UWP apps visible in the Windows App Store,
but only visible to you and/or those in your business,
you see?
In the previous module I told you that the higher level,
the business SKUs of Windows 10 allow you to do
sideloading and have your own custom app store.
That's important from a business perspective because you want to control
even what UWP apps your users can install on their systems.
Today on Windows 10 we, again, have the Windows App Store.
The store has undergone several name changes as well,
and these Windows Store Apps are called either that,
Windows Store Apps or Trusted Windows Store Apps.
Developers will call them UWP apps in general.
Some elements of these UWP apps,
what you're seeing now is a screenshot from a Windows 8 era metro style app,
and this is the weather app obviously, and it's very jarring,
as I said,
to someone who's used to traditional apps because
where do you get the close button?
Where do you get back to your desktop?
It's quite unintuitive, honestly.
Now in Windows 10 these apps they have the same general feel.
They're very graphically intensive in multimedia,
but you'll notice that they can run in a window that has the minimize,
maximize, and close button.
There are additional user interface elements,
the gear icon to get you into settings.
A search control in weather would be useful if you want to look up
another ZIP code or city and look at its weather,
so Microsoft is maintaining a lot of what makes the UWP apps cool,
namely a live,
immersive experience while also giving us the
concession of a familiar user interface.
We saw earlier in this training how you can customize the Windows 10 Start menu,
and it's a hybrid menu where you can have your traditional desktop
applications at the left in the normal display,
and then at the right you have your UWP apps,
and those are what are called live tiles.
So if you have the weather app every time you open the Start menu you can
see the weather snapshot for whatever your target city is.
If you have the stock prices app in the Start menu
you can easily glance it there, so it's meant to give you live,
dynamic data as well.
I want to say one more thing about UWP apps before we do our demo,
and that is besides the universality of these apps,
one other element that Microsoft puts into these is
the idea of sandboxed security.
Remember I told you that desktop apps generally don't have that.
These trusted Windows apps are heavily constrained on your system.
They're not allowed to go outside of their sandbox by default,
and if they do request that access you have to explicitly allow it,
you see?
And then I guess the final thing, but wait,
there's more,
is that the way you develop or program these UWP apps is fundamentally
different from how you do traditional desktop apps.
In other words,
you might have noticed that the interface almost looks like a web page,
and as a matter of fact, you can build UWP apps with JavaScript.
So if you're a web developer and you're accustomed to this kind of
thing you don't have to necessarily learn C# and Win32 desktop app development in order to create these UWP apps.